# Documentation for Contributors to Vala

<ul class="section-toc">
<li><a href="compiler-guide">Compiler Guide</a></li>
</ul>

Vala follows a collaborative, open source development model. The
following guidelines are here to help if you want to contribute back to
the project.

## Building from Source

See the ['Building Vala' section of the README.md file](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/vala/-/blob/master/README.md) in
Vala's source repository.

## Development Process

### Submitting Bug Reports

Vala uses [GNOME's GitLab](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/vala/issues) to track issues.

### Submitting Patches

Patches should be submitted through Vala's GNOME GitLab instance as a
[merge request](https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/vala/merge_requests). See
the [GNOME Project Handbook - Change Submission Page](https://handbook.gnome.org/development/change-submission.html/)
for more details.

If you are not a GNOME developer then you will need to first create a
fork of Vala to your personal GNOME GitLab instance, which you then
clone to your local machine.

Patches to the compiler should include one or more test cases.

Patches will also be accepted as attachments to an issue.

### Reviewing and Updating Patches

If your merge request requires updating after review then use
`git rebase --interactive` to squash the changes and `git push --force`
the updated branch to your GNOME GitLab instance. GitLab will then pick
up the changes and show them in the merge request.

### Committing Patches

#### Commit title conventions

In commits made to the repo, the commit
titles typically have the following format: `type_or_location_of_change: Summary of change`.

Here's are some examples: 
- "glib-2.0: allow FileUtils.open_tmp's first argument to be null".
- "ci: Skip meson dist in flatpak jobs"
- "vala: Keep depfile empty if no dependencies were written"

If changes have been made to multiple parts of the repo, you can reference multiple locations in a comma-separated list
like this: "vala, libvaladoc: Fix color support detection in log reporting".

While this commit title format is not mandatory, it does give reviewers context of the changes made
in your commits at a glance.

Merge requests titles tend to use the same title conventions too.

## Maintaining Bindings

The Vala repository carries a number of bindings to libraries. The
bindings are written in one of three ways:

1.  Manually
2.  Generated using `vapigen` from a GIR (GObject Introspection Repository) file
3.  Generated using `vapigen` from a deprecated GIDL file

To update a binding the first thing to do is find how the binding is
written. Look at the top of the VAPI file. If there is no comment
`generated by vapigen, do not modify` then the VAPI is written manually.
For example `glib-2.0.vapi` is written manually. If the VAPI is
generated using files from the `./metadata/` directory then the VAPI is
generated from a GIR file. For example `gio-2.0.vapi` is generated from
a GIR file. If the VAPI is generated using files from the `./packages/`
directory then the VAPI is generated from a GIDL file. For example the
`gtk+-2.0.vapi` is generated from a GIDL file, but the `gtk+-3.0.vapi`
is generated from the GIR.

Patches should be submitted through the merge request process
[outlined above](#submitting-patches).
Patches for generated bindings should also include the changes to the
VAPI itself. The Vala repository keeps the generated VAPIs in version
control as well as the metadata. There is no need for test cases to be
added for bindings.

- [Writing a VAPI Without Using GObject Introspection](../developer-guides/bindings/writing-a-vapi-manually) - detailed guide on writing a VAPI manually
- [Generating a VAPI with GObject Introspection](../developer-guides/bindings/generating-a-vapi-with-gobject-introspection) - details on generating a VAPI using `vapigen`

## Developing the Compiler

### Documentation

-   [Compiler Guide](compiler-guide) - Documentation for hacking on the compiler
-   [Code Attributes](https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/vala/manual/attributes.html)

The internal API documentation, in Valadoc form, should be built from the source:

```shell
make -C doc internal-api-docs
```

This will generate output similar to
[https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/vala/docs/index.html](https://gnome.pages.gitlab.gnome.org/vala/docs/index.html)

### Debugging

Using `--enable-debug` will include debugging symbols in the Vala
compiler:

```shell
make distclean
./autogen.sh --enable-debug
```

This will enable Vala source files with line numbers to be shown when
using `gdb` to generate a backtrace after a segmentation fault.

You can also change GLib criticals and warnings to generate a
segmentation fault to enable a backtrace. This is done with the
`G_DEBUG` environment variable:

```shell
G_DEBUG=fatal-criticals gdb --args <em>my_valac_version</em> my_test_program.vala
```

See [Running and debugging GLib Applications](https://developer.gnome.org/glib/stable/glib-running.html) 
for more information on `G_DEBUG`.

### The Build Server

Vala maintainers make use of a [Buildbot server](http://paldo.org:8010/)
to build a selection of projects written in Vala with a version of Vala
from the main GNOME git repository. Of main interest to contributors is
the [vala-staging builder](http://paldo.org:8010/builders/vala-staging) and also 
the [vala-master builder](http://paldo.org:8010/builders/vala-master). Builds from these
servers include log files from STDIO for each build. This helps identify
any problems with a patch that was committed to Vala.
